README.md, before:

# Profiling & Optimisation (Python)

## Introduction

This lesson introduces the basics of profiling and optimising Python code. The course is designed to be accessible to Python users of all skill levels (beyond total beginner). The optimisations presented should be considered performance best practices, they are demonstrated with small programming patterns that demonstrate multiple approaches in code to achieve the same result with differing performance.

## Contact Us

This course was originally authored by and is currently maintained by [@Robadob](https://github.com/Robadob), it is a fork of the University of Sheffield branded course. Both repositories are maintained, so issues will be monitored .

## Contributing

See [Contributing](CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Acknowledgements

The initial development of this course was funded by the University of Sheffield, to support training initiatives for users of their [Stanage HPC cluster](https://docs.hpc.shef.ac.uk/en/latest/stanage/index.html).

Commit message:

Move to lifecycle beta status

README.md, after:

# Profiling & Optimisation (Python)

## Introduction

This lesson introduces the basics of profiling and optimising Python code. The course is designed to be accessible to Python users of all skill levels (beyond total beginner). The optimisations presented should be considered performance best practices, they are demonstrated with small programming patterns that demonstrate multiple approaches in code to achieve the same result with differing performance.

## Contact Us

This course was originally authored by [@Robadob](https://github.com/Robadob) and is now also maintained by [@JostMigenda](https://github.com/Robadob).

Releases prior to Beta, exist in the original [University of Sheffield repository](https://github.com/RSE-Sheffield/pando-python), which includes custom branding. Please direct issues with course content to the [Carpentries Incubator repository](https://github.com/carpentries-incubator/pando-python).

## Contributing

See [Contributing](CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Acknowledgements

The initial development of this course was funded by the University of Sheffield, to support training initiatives for users of their [Stanage HPC cluster](https://docs.hpc.shef.ac.uk/en/latest/stanage/index.html).
