learners/setup.md, before:

---
title: Setup
---

<!--
## Data Sets

FIXME: place any data you want learners to use in `episodes/data` and then use
       a relative link ( [data zip file](data/lesson-data.zip) ) to provide a
       link to it, replacing the example.com link.
       
Download the [data zip file](https://example.com/FIXME) and unzip it to your Desktop
-->

## Software Setup

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: discussion

### Details

This course uses Python and was developed using Python 3.11, therefore it is recommended that you have a Python 3.11 or newer environment.

You may want to create a new Python virtual environment for the course, this can be done with your preferred Python environment manager (e.g. `conda`, `pipenv`), the required packages can all be installed via `pip`.

<!-- conda create -n pando python
     conda activate pando -->

The non-core Python packages required by the course are `pytest`, `snakeviz`, `line_profiler`, `numpy`, `pandas` and `matplotlib` which can be installed via `pip`.
 
```sh
pip install pytest snakeviz line_profiler[all] numpy pandas matplotlib
```

To complete some of the exercises you will need to use a text-editor or Python IDE, so make sure you have your favourite available.

:::::::::::::: instructor

As the instructor, you should additionally install the `shapely` package, which you may need for a brief demo during the episode on scientific Python packages.

```sh
pip install shapely
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::


:::::::::::::::: spoiler

### Mac OS (line_profiler)

If you are unable to install `line_profiler` via `pip` on MacOS. Instead it can be installed via `conda`.

```sh
conda install line_profiler
```

It may first be necessary to enable conda-forge.

```sh
conda config --add channels conda-forge
```
::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Commit message:

Text simplification and typographic improvements via @ICR-RSE-Group (#73)
Including an additional figure that was reproduced to improve the accessibility of the font used.

This is a manual merge of approriate changes from PR (#51) due to large conflicts with earlier merged optimisation PRs.

With thanks to the original authors of these changes @msarkis-icr and @stacyrse

learners/setup.md, after:

---
title: Setup
---

<!--
## Data Sets

FIXME: place any data you want learners to use in `episodes/data` and then use
       a relative link ( [data zip file](data/lesson-data.zip) ) to provide a
       link to it, replacing the example.com link.
       
Download the [data zip file](https://example.com/FIXME) and unzip it to your Desktop
-->

## Software Setup

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: discussion

### Details

This course uses Python and was developed using Python 3.11, therefore it is recommended that you have a Python 3.11 or newer environment.

You may want to create a new Python virtual environment for the course, this can be done with your preferred Python environment manager (e.g. `conda`, `pipenv`), the required packages can all be installed via `pip`.

If you have `conda` available, you can create and activate a new environment named `py311_env` with Python 3.11 using the following command:

```sh
conda create --name py311_env python=3.11
conda activate py311_env
```

The non-core Python packages required by the course are `pytest`, `snakeviz`, `line_profiler`, `numpy`, `pandas` and `matplotlib` which can be installed via `pip`.
 
```sh
pip install pytest snakeviz line_profiler[all] numpy pandas matplotlib
```

To complete some of the exercises you will need to use a text-editor or Python IDE, so make sure you have your favourite available.

:::::::::::::: instructor

As the instructor, you should additionally install the `shapely` package, which you may need for a brief demo during the episode on scientific Python packages.

```sh
pip install shapely
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::


:::::::::::::::: spoiler

### Mac OS (line_profiler)

If you are unable to install `line_profiler` via `pip` on MacOS. Instead it can be installed via `conda`.

```sh
conda install -c conda-forge line_profiler
```
::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
